---
title: "Fundamental Groups of Graphs"
date: 2023-11-20T14:31:40+05:30
draft: false
---

Recall that a graph `$\Gamma = \Gamma(V, E)$` consists of sets `$V$` (vertices) and `$E$` (edges) and functions `$\iota: E \to V$` (initial vertex) and a function `$E\to E$` denoted `$e\mapsto \bar{e}$` (reversing orientation) so that `$\bar{\bar{e}} = e$` and `$\bar{e} \neq e$` for all `$e\in E$`. We define `$\tau(e)=\iota(\bar{e})$` for an edge `$e.$` We associate to `$\Gamma$` a topological space `$|\Gamma|$` called its _geometric realization_, which is the quotient 
`$$\left(V\coprod \left(\coprod_{e\in E} I_e\right)\right)/\sim,$$` 
where `$I_e$` is a copy of the unit interval `$[0, 1]$` for each `$e\in E$`, and `$\sim$` the equivalence relation generated by the following relations, where the pair `$(s, e)$` for `$e\in E$` and `$s\in [0, 1]$` denotes the point in `$I_e$` corresponding to `$s$`:
* __a.__ For each `$e\in E$` we have `$(0, e)\sim \iota(e)$`.
* __b.__ For each `$e\in E$` and `$s\in [0, 1]$` we have `$(s, e)\sim (1-s, \bar{e})$`.

A _subbgraph_ `$\Gamma'(V', E')$` of a graph consists of sets `$V'\subset V$` and `$E'\subset E$` so that for `$e\in E'$` we have `$\iota(e)\in V'$` and `$\bar{e}\in E'$`. The restrictions of the functions `$\iota$` and `$e\mapsto \bar{e}$` to `$E'$` make `$\Gamma'$` a graph. 

1. Show that there is a natural inclusion of `$|\Gamma'|$` into `$|\Gamma|$`.

We regard `$|\Gamma'|$` as a subspace of `$\Gamma|$` using this inclusion map. The _quotient graph_ `$\Gamma/\Gamma'$` is a graph with vertex set `$V_Q=(V\setminus V')\cup \{\Gamma'\}$` (i.e., with a single vertex for all vertices of `$\Gamma'$`) and edge set `$E_Q = E\setminus E'.$` For clarity, we often denote the vertex corresponding to `$\Gamma'$` as `$v_{\Gamma'}$`.

2. Show that we have functions `$\iota_Q: E_Q \to V_Q$` and `$E_Q \to E_Q$` induced by `$\iota$` and `$e\mapsto \bar{e}$`.
3. Show that the spaces `$|\Gamma/\Gamma'|$` and `$|\Gamma|/|\Gamma'|$` are homeomorphic.


A _tree_ `$T=T(V, E)$` is a non-empty graph so that for vertices `$v, v'\in V$` there is a unique reduced edge-path from `$v$` to `$v'$` (for `$v\neq v'$`, a reduced edge-path from `$v$` to `$v'$` is a sequence of edges `$e_1, e_2,\dots, e_n$` with `$\iota(e_1)=v$`, `$\tau(e_n)= v'$`, and, for `$1\leq i< n$`, `$\tau(e_i)=\iota(e_{i+1})$` and `$e_{i+1}\neq \bar{e_i}$`). Let `$\Gamma= \Gamma(V, E)$` be a graph, `$x_0\in V$` a vertex, and `$T= T(V_T, E_T)$` a subgraph which is a tree. Suppose further that `$V_T= V$` (such a tree exists for any connected graph but we will not prove it). We show below that the quotient map `$q: |\Gamma| \to |\Gamma|/|T|$` is a homotopy equivalence. 

For `$v\in V$`, `$v\neq x_0$`, let `$\theta_v$` be the (unique) reduced edge-path from `$x_0$` to `$v$`. For `$e \in E\setminus E_T$` let `$e_Q$` denote the image of `$e$` in `$|\Gamma|/|T|$`. We use the idenitification `$|\Gamma|/|T| = |\Gamma/T|$` repeatedly.

4. Show that there is a continuous map `$p: |\Gamma|/|T| \to |\Gamma|$` that maps the vertex `$v_T$` (i.e., the vertex corresponding to `$T$`) to `$x_0$`, and, for each edge `$e\in E\setminus E_T$`, maps `$e_Q$` to the path `$\theta_{\iota(e)}*e*\overline{\theta_{\tau(e)}}$` up to homotopy (homotopy is needed only for reparametrization issues).

5. Show that `$q\circ p: |\Gamma|/|T| \to |\Gamma|/|T|$` is homotopic fixing the basepoint `$v_T$` to the identity map. Note that such a homotopy is already determined on `$(v_T\times [0, 1])\cup (E_Q\times \{0, 1\})$`, and this has to be extended to `$e_Q\times [0, 1]$` for each `$e_Q\in E_Q$` in a continuous manner.

6. Show that `$p\circ q: |\Gamma| \to |\Gamma|$` is homotopic to the identity fixing the basepoint `$x_0$`. Note that such a homotopy is already determined on `$(x_0\times [0, 1])\cup (E\times \{0, 1\})$`. This has to be extended to `$v\times [0, 1]$` for each `$v\in V\setminus\{x_0\}$` and then to `$e\times [0, 1]$` for each `$e\in E$` in a continuous manner. The former can be done using the paths `$\theta_v$`.